Docs/pluggable components (#2875)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/components/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-discovery.md

---
type: docs

> title: "Plugging in"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How-To: Discover a pluggable component"
```

> linkTitle: "Plugging in"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "How to: Discover a pluggable component"
```

weight: 4500

> description: "How-To: Making Dapr discover a pluggable component"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to help Dapr discover your pluggable component"
```

---

## Service Discovery Process

> <img src="/images/grpc-components.png" width=400>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moving this down.

> [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) Dapr components are typically run as containers or processes that communicate with the Dapr main process via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in runtime by Dapr using the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pluggable, [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) components are typically run as containers or processes that need to communicate with the Dapr main process via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in runtime by Dapr using the following steps:
```

1. The Component listens to an [Unix Domain Socket][uds] placed on the shared volume.
2. The Dapr runtime lists all [Unix Domain Socket][uds] in the shared volume.
3. The Dapr runtime connects with the socket and uses gRPC reflection to discover all services that such component implements.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="/images/grpc-components.png" width=400>
```

> A single component can implement multiple [building blocks](http://localhost:1313/concepts/building-blocks-concept/) at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single component can implement multiple [building blocks]({{< ref building-blocks-concept.md >}}) at once.
```

> Dapr's built-in components come ready to be used out of the box: you just need to have provide Dapr with their YAML configuration and you are ready to go. That is not the case with gRPC-based Components, which require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr. Namely:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Dapr's built-in components come [ready to be used out of the box](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md, pluggable components require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr.
```

> 1. gGRPC-based Components need to be started and ready to take requests _before_ Dapr itself is started;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Pluggable components need to be started and ready to take requests _before_ Dapr itself is started.
```

> 2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used used for the Pluggable Component communication need to be made accessible to both Dapr and gRPC Component and, as expected,

Reviewer 2: I think the original list had 3 steps. Now the second one is not finished and is finishing on `and, as expected`

```suggestion
2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used used for the Pluggable Component communication need to be made accessible to both Dapr and gRPC Component.
```

> 2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used used for the Pluggable Component communication need to be made accessible to both Dapr and gRPC Component and, as expected,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used for the pluggable component communication needs to be accessible to both Dapr and the gRPC-based component.
```

> Dapr does not take part on orchestrating gRPC-components creation and deployment. This is left for its users and it will be different depending on whether Dapr and gRPC-based components are ran in standalone mode, as processes or as containers in Kubernetes. This will also change the mechanisms available to share [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files between Dapr and gRPC-based components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr does not interfere with orchestrating gRPC-components creation and deployment. This is your domain, and it will be different depending on how Dapr and your gRPC-based components are run:

- In standalone mode, as processes, or 
- In Kubernetes, as containers. 

This will also change the mechanisms available to share [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files between Dapr and gRPC-based components.
```

> In the next sections, we will discuss how to make your component discoveriable by Dapr based on the running environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select your running environment to begin making your component discoverable by Dapr.
```

{{< tabs "Standalone" "Kubernetes" >}}

{{% codetab %}}

> ## Step 1: Running the component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run the component
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> As mentioned previously, your component must be up and running and the Unix Socket must be created running before Dapr starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, your component and the Unix Socket must be up and running before Dapr starts.
```

> By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`. The name of the file without any extension will be the name of the component, for `memstore.sock`, the component name will be `memstore`. Since you are running Dapr in the same host as the component, all we have to ensure is that this folder and the files within it are accessible and writable by both our component and Dapr.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`. 

The name of the file without any extension will be the name of the component. For example, for `memstore.sock`, the component name will be `memstore`. 

Since you are running Dapr in the same host as the component, simply verify this folder and the files within it are accessible and writable by both your component and Dapr.
```

> ## Step 2: Declaring a gRPC-based Pluggable Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Declare a gRPC-based pluggable component
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> gRPC-based Pluggable Components are defined using the [Component Spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}) and its `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define your gRPC-based pluggable components using a [component spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}). Your component's `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension). 
```

> Place the following file in the defined components-path (replace `your_socket_goes_here` by your component socket name without any extension and `your_component_type` by your component type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Place the following YAML file in the defined components-path, replacing:

- `your_socket_goes_here` with your component socket name (no extension)
- `your_component_type` with your component type
```

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

> Using `memstore.sock` as a concrete example we have the following, and assuming that `memstore` implements the StateStoreService.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the previous `memstore.sock` example:
```

- `your_component_type` would be replaced by `state`, as it is a state store.

> - `your_socket_goes_here` would be replaced by `memstore`: `memstore.sock` without any extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `your_socket_goes_here` would be replaced by `memstore`.
```

The full configuration for `memstore` would be:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: state.memstore
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

Save this file as `component.yaml` in Dapr's configuration folder.

> ## Step 3: Running Dapr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run Dapr
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> Initialize Dapr by following the [tutorial]({{< ref get-started-api.md >}}), and make sure that your component Spec is placed in the right folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Initialize Dapr]({{< ref get-started-api.md >}}), and make sure that your component spec is placed in the right folder.
```

> > Note: 1.9.0 is the minimum Dapr version that supports gRPC-based Pluggable Components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Dapr v1.9.0 is the minimum version that supports gRPC-based pluggable components. Run the following command specify the runtime version: `dapr init --runtime-version 1.9.0`
{{% /alert %}}
```

> > specify the runtime version by using `--runtime-version` flag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<!-- We should list the actual command line the user will be typing here -->

> That's it! Now we are able to call the statestore APIs via Dapr API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it! Now you're able to call the state store APIs via Dapr API. See it in action by running the following. Replace `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:
```

> See it working by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```shell
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '[{ "key": "name", "value": "Bruce Wayne", "metadata": {}}]' http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore
```

> Retrieve the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieve the value, replacing `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:
```

```shell
curl http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore/name
```

> > replace $PORT by Dapr http port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> {{% /codetab %}}

Reviewer 2: Blame Hugo, but we need to repeat reference links definitions on each codetab

```suggestion

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket
{{% /codetab %}}
```

Reviewer 2: We are removing codetabs so this is irrelevant now.

{{% codetab %}}

> ## Step 1: Build and Publish a container for your gRPC-based Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build and publish a container for your gRPC-based component
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> As a prerequisite for running on kubernetes mode, your component must run as a container. Which means that it should be published first and accessible by your kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure your component is running as a container, published first and accessible to your Kubernetes cluster.
```

> ## Step 2: Deploying Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> Follow the steps provided in the [Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref kubernetes-deploy.md >}}) docs and make sure you have a kubernetes cluster configured with Dapr version 1.9+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps provided in the [Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref kubernetes-deploy.md >}}) docs and make sure you have a Kubernetes cluster configured with Dapr version 1.9+.
```

> ## Step 3: Adding Pluggable Component Container in your Deployments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add the pluggable component container in your deployments
```

Per the [template in the contributor guide](https://docs.dapr.io/contributing/docs-contrib/docs-templates/howto-template/).

> When running on kubernetes mode, gRPC-based Pluggable Components are side-car containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running on Kubernetes mode, gRPC-based pluggable components are sidecar containers.
```

> As gRPC-based Pluggable Components are backed by [Unix Domain Sockets][uds], the first step is configuring the deployment spec to ensure that the socket created by your Pluggable Component are accessible by Dapr runtime, to do that, you have to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since gRPC-based pluggable components are backed by [Unix Domain Sockets][uds], make the socket created by your pluggable component accessible by Dapr runtime. Configure the deployment spec:
```

> 1. mount volumes,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Mount volumes
```

> 2. hint Dapr where the mounted unix socket volume is and also,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Hint to Dapr the mounted Unix socket volume location
```

> 3. attach such volume to your Pluggable Component container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Attach volume to your pluggable component container
```

> Below you can see an example of a Deployment that configures a Pluggable Component:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a deployment that configures a pluggable component:
```

    app: app
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: app
      annotations:
        dapr.io/unix-domain-socket-path: "/tmp/dapr-components-sockets" ## required, the default path where Dapr will discovery components.
        dapr.io/app-id: "my-app"
        dapr.io/enabled: "true"
        dapr.io/sidecar-listen-addresses: "0.0.0.0"
    spec:
      volumes: ## required, the sockets volume
        - name: dapr-unix-domain-socket
          emptyDir: {}
      containers:
        ### --------------------- YOUR APPLICATION CONTAINER GOES HERE -----------
        ##
        ### --------------------- YOUR APPLICATION CONTAINER GOES HERE -----------
        ### This is the pluggable component container.
        - name: component
          volumeMounts: # required, the sockets volume mount
            - name: dapr-unix-domain-socket
              mountPath: /dapr-unix-domain-sockets
          image: YOUR_IMAGE_GOES_HERE:YOUR_IMAGE_VERSION
          env:
            - name: DAPR_COMPONENTS_SOCKETS_FOLDER # Tells the component where the sockets should be created.
              value: /dapr-unix-domain-sockets
```

> Great, do not apply the Deployment yet, let's add one more configuration: The Component Spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before applying the deployment, let's add one more configuration: the component spec.
```

> ## Step 4: Declaring a gRPC-based Pluggable Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Declare a gRPC-based pluggable component
```

> gRPC-based Pluggable Componets are defined using the [Component Spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}) and its `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRPC-based pluggable components are defined using a [component spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}). The component `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension). In the following example YAML, replace:
- `your_socket_goes_here` with your component socket name (no extension)
- `your_component_type` with your component type
```

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
scopes:
  - backend
```

> You should also [scope]({{< ref component-scopes >}}) your component to make sure that only the target configured application will try to connect with the pluggable component since it will only be running in its Deployment, otherwise the runtime will fail when initializing the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Scope]({{< ref component-scopes >}}) your component to make sure that only the target configured application will try to connect with the pluggable component, since it will only be running in its deployment. Otherwise the runtime will fail when initializing the component.
```

> > Note: Replace `your_socket_goes_here` by your component socket name without any extension, and `your_component_type` by your component type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> > That's it! **[Apply the created manifests to your kubernetes cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-apply)**, and then you are able to call the statestore APIs via Dapr API,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it! **[Apply the created manifests to your Kubernetes cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-apply)**, and call the state store APIs via Dapr API.
```

> > Use [kubernetes pod forwarder](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/port-forward-access-application-cluster/) to access the Daprd runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [Kubernetes pod forwarder](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/port-forward-access-application-cluster/) to access the `daprd` runtime.
```

> > See it working by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See it in action by running the following. Replace `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:
```

```shell
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '[{ "key": "name", "value": "Bruce Wayne", "metadata": {}}]' http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore
```

> Retrieve the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieve the value, replacing `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:
```

```shell
curl http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore/name
```

> > replace $PORT by Dapr http port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> {{% /codetab %}}

Reviewer 2: Blame Hugo, but we need to repeat reference links definitions on each codetab

```suggestion

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket
{{% /codetab %}}
```

Reviewer 2: We are removing codetabs so this is irrelevant now.

{{< /tabs >}}

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Next Steps

> - Getting started with your own .NET Pluggable Component using our [sample code](https://github.com/mcandeia/dapr-samples/tree/sample/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get started with your own .NET pluggable component using our [sample code](https://github.com/mcandeia/dapr-samples/tree/sample/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)
```

@msfussell @greenie-msft should we bring this sample into the dapr/quickstart repo?

> - Getting started with your own .NET Pluggable Component using our [sample code](https://github.com/mcandeia/dapr-samples/tree/sample/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)

Author: Waiting for the PR to be merged so that I can change the link here
```suggestion
- Getting started with your own .NET Pluggable Component using our [sample code](https://github.com/mcandeia/dapr-samples/tree/sample/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)
```

---
type: docs

> title: "How-To: Discover a pluggable component"

Reviewer 3: The title of this topic could be better IMO. Currently the docs use "registering" components. https://docs.dapr.io/operations/components/component-schema/. Hence I would prefer to call this
```suggestion
title: "How-To: Register a pluggable component"
```

linkTitle: "How To: Discover a pluggable component"
weight: 4500

> description: "Learn how to help Dapr discover your pluggable component"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to register a pluggable component"
```

---

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Service Discovery Process

> Pluggable, [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) components are typically run as containers or processes that need to communicate with the Dapr main process via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in runtime by Dapr using the following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pluggable, [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) components are typically run as containers or processes that need to communicate with the Dapr runtime via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in the runtime with the following steps:
```

> 1. The Component listens to an [Unix Domain Socket][uds] placed on the shared volume.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The component listens to an [Unix Domain Socket][uds] placed on the shared volume.
```

2. The Dapr runtime lists all [Unix Domain Socket][uds] in the shared volume.

> 3. The Dapr runtime connects with the socket and uses gRPC reflection to discover all services that such component implements.

Reviewer 3: Services is a confusing term here, since services are used in place for applications. Can this be something like this instead
```suggestion
3. The Dapr runtime connects with each socket and uses gRPC reflection to discover all met methods from a given building block API that the component implements.
```

Author: we can, but "services" is widely used to refer protobuf services, can we use "proto services" instead?

A single component can implement multiple [building blocks]({{< ref building-blocks-concept.md >}}) at once.

<img src="/images/grpc-components.png" width=50%>

> While Dapr's built-in components come [ready to be used out of the box](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md), pluggable components require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While Dapr's built-in components come [are included with the runtime](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md), pluggable components require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr.
```

1. Pluggable components need to be started and ready to take requests _before_ Dapr itself is started.

> 2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used used for the pluggable component communication need to be made accessible to both Dapr and pluggable component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The [Unix Domain Socket][uds] file used for the pluggable component communication need to be made accessible to both Dapr and pluggable component.
```

> Dapr does not interfere with orchestrating components containers creation and deployment. This is your domain, and it will be different depending on how Dapr and your components are run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dapr does not launch any pluggable components processes or containers. This is something that you need to do, and it will be different depending on how Dapr and your components are run:
```

> - In standalone mode, as processes or containers, or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In self-hosted mode as processes or containers.
```

- In Kubernetes, as containers.

> This will also change the mechanisms available to share [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files between Dapr and pluggable components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This also changes the approach to share [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files between Dapr and pluggable components.
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

> As a prerequisite the running operating system must supports Unix Domain Sockets, any UNIX or UNIX-like system (Mac, Linux, or for local development [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) for Windows users) should be sufficient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a prerequisite the operating system must supports Unix Domain Sockets, any UNIX or UNIX-like system (Mac, Linux, or for local development [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) for Windows users) should be sufficient.
```

{{% /alert %}}

> Select your running environment to begin making your component discoverable by Dapr.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Select your environment to begin making your component discoverable.
```

{{< tabs "Standalone" "Kubernetes" >}}

> {{% codetab %}}

Reviewer 2: I would say that codetabs are great when you can choose two journeys that are completely independent. I don't think this is really the case here. Yes, there is content duplication, but we provide more details on the Standalone path and just rush through on the Kubernetes one. For instance, how we come up with the `spec.type` field in the component spec is explained better in the Standalone route. The default location for UDS is not even mentioned in the k8s path, just that you better share it.

I would rather remove these codetabs _or_ have some of these common topics defined/detailed before so that concepts are presented once and presented right.

Thoughts?

Author: I'm ok with it, I see others docs doing the same (creating tabs for standalone/k8s), just need to sanity check if it make sense,

WDYT @msfussell ?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but if we are having these tabs, than we better ensure content on both is solid. Right not the k8s one could use some love.

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Run the component

> As mentioned previously, your component and the Unix Socket must be up and running before Dapr starts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both your component and the Unix Socket must be running before Dapr starts.
```

> By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`.

Reviewer 3: Why have /tmp/dapr-components-sockets and not just /dapr-components-sockets?

Author: The preference to place them under /tmp is related to the fact that it isn't a root-required directory. Otherwise users need to run Dapr with elevated privileges (sudo)

btw: [It used to be `/dapr-components-sockets`](https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/5262#discussion_r982729642)

> By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`.

Reviewer 2: As a past sys. adm., it freaks me out a bit having a service that is handling configuration data on the `/tmp` folder. That is why I had explicit mention of the `DAPR_COMPONENTS_SOCKETS_FOLDER` env. var. in a past version of this document: because it allows you to configure this folder to somewhere else like /var/run or a place that is not `chmod 1777` by default. 

```suggestion
By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`. This can be overwritten by the `DAPR_COMPONENTS_SOCKETS_FOLDER` environment variable. 
```

Author: the problem is the users can't override it in a simple manner.  Remember that Dapr runs:

1) on standalone mode: inside a container started by dapr cli
2) on kubernetes mode: injected by operator

both options does not have an easy way to configure env-vars. The right way of doing this is actually releasing a dapr-cli version supporting a new command flag `--components-sockets-path`, and for k8s allow configure it on helm charts

regard the tmp choice see [here](https://github.com/dapr/docs/pull/2875/files#r990864945)

Reviewer 2: I am not commenting on the choice of `/tmp` - I get it. But there is a way to override/customize this decision to somewhere safer. It might not be trivial for k8s but for all other paths it is - we both had it done for a docker compose sample, so that definitely not a problem for standalone mode at all.

Author: >we both had it done for a docker compose sample, so that definitely not a problem for standalone mode at all.

We do, using the daprd image right? which is not the "conventional" way, do you agree? end-users uses dapr cli to start dapr container as opposite to starting containers manually using docker-compose, does it make sense to you @tmacam ?

Reviewer 2: Not really. I don't really see why we want to hide this env. var. from the docs. It is not documented anywhere else IIRC and it make it look like the only option for the shared path is a hardcoded `tmp` path, which is an anti-pattern to me.

> The name of the file without any extension will be the name of the component. For example, for `memstore.sock`, the component name will be `memstore`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The name of the file without any extension is the name of the component. For example, for `memstore.sock`, the component name is `memstore`.
```

> Since you are running Dapr in the same host as the component, simply verify this folder and the files within it are accessible and writable by both your component and Dapr.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since you are running Dapr in the same host as the component, verify this folder and the files within it are accessible and writable by both your component and Dapr.
```

> ## Declare a pluggable component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Define the component
```

> Define your pluggable components using a [component spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}). Your component's `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Define your component using a [component spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}). Your component's `type` is derived from the socket name, without the file extension.
```

> Place the following YAML file in the defined components-path, replacing:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Save the component YAML file in the components-path, replacing:
```

- `your_socket_goes_here` with your component socket name (no extension)
- `your_component_type` with your component type

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

Using the previous `memstore.sock` example:

- `your_component_type` would be replaced by `state`, as it is a state store.
- `your_socket_goes_here` would be replaced by `memstore`.

The full configuration for `memstore` would be:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: state.memstore
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

> Save this file as `component.yaml` in Dapr's configuration folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Save this file as `component.yaml` in Dapr's component configuration folder.
```

## Run Dapr

[Initialize Dapr]({{< ref get-started-api.md >}}), and make sure that your component spec is placed in the right folder.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Dapr v1.9.0 is the minimum version that supports pluggable components.
Run the following command specify the runtime version: dapr init --runtime-version 1.9.0
{{% /alert %}}

<!-- We should list the actual command line the user will be typing here -->

That's it! Now you're able to call the state store APIs via Dapr API. See it in action by running the following. Replace `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:

```shell
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '[{ "key": "name", "value": "Bruce Wayne", "metadata": {}}]' http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore
```

Retrieve the value, replacing `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:

```shell
curl http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore/name
```

{{% /codetab %}}

{{% codetab %}}

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

> ## Build and publish a container for your Pluggable component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Build and publish a container for your pluggable component
```

Make sure your component is running as a container, published first and accessible to your Kubernetes cluster.

## Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster

> Follow the steps provided in the [Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref kubernetes-deploy.md >}}) docs and make sure you have a Kubernetes cluster configured with Dapr version 1.9+.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Follow the steps provided in the [Deploy Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref kubernetes-deploy.md >}}) docs.
```

## Add the pluggable component container in your deployments

> When running on Kubernetes mode, pluggable components are sidecar containers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When running in Kubernetes mode, pluggable components are deployed as containers in the same pod as your application.
```

> Since pluggable components are backed by [Unix Domain Sockets][uds], make the socket created by your pluggable component accessible by Dapr runtime. Configure the deployment spec:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since pluggable components are backed by [Unix Domain Sockets][uds], make the socket created by your pluggable component accessible by Dapr runtime. Configure the deployment spec to:
```

1. Mount volumes
2. Hint to Dapr the mounted Unix socket volume location
3. Attach volume to your pluggable component container

Below is an example of a deployment that configures a pluggable component:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: app
  labels:
    app: app
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: app
      annotations:
        dapr.io/unix-domain-socket-path: "/tmp/dapr-components-sockets" ## required, the default path where Dapr will discovery components.
        dapr.io/app-id: "my-app"
        dapr.io/enabled: "true"

>         dapr.io/sidecar-listen-addresses: "0.0.0.0"

Reviewer 3: Why do you add this `sidecar-listen-addresses`? Hopefully this is not required

Author: removed

    spec:
      volumes: ## required, the sockets volume
        - name: dapr-unix-domain-socket
          emptyDir: {}
      containers:
        ### --------------------- YOUR APPLICATION CONTAINER GOES HERE -----------
        ##
        ### --------------------- YOUR APPLICATION CONTAINER GOES HERE -----------
        ### This is the pluggable component container.
        - name: component
          volumeMounts: # required, the sockets volume mount
            - name: dapr-unix-domain-socket
              mountPath: /dapr-unix-domain-sockets
          image: YOUR_IMAGE_GOES_HERE:YOUR_IMAGE_VERSION
          env:
            - name: DAPR_COMPONENTS_SOCKETS_FOLDER # Tells the component where the sockets should be created.
              value: /dapr-unix-domain-sockets
```

Before applying the deployment, let's add one more configuration: the component spec.

> ## Declare a pluggable component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Define a component
```

Pluggable components are defined using a [component spec]({{< ref component-schema.md >}}). The component `type` is derived from the socket name (without the file extension). In the following example YAML, replace:

- `your_socket_goes_here` with your component socket name (no extension)
- `your_component_type` with your component type

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
scopes:
  - backend
```

> [Scope]({{< ref component-scopes >}}) your component to make sure that only the target configured application will try to connect with the pluggable component, since it will only be running in its deployment. Otherwise the runtime will fail when initializing the component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Scope]({{< ref component-scopes >}}) your component to make sure that only the target application can connect with the pluggable component, since it will only be running in its deployment. Otherwise the runtime fails when initializing the component.
```
